# Lecture 5: Statistical Modeling 

### What is a Statistical Model?
- A statistical model is a family of distributions that are indexed by parameters. They're primary uses are for statistical inference and probability purposes:
    - Statistical Inference is all about estimating the parameters of a model that represents a pariticular dataset. For example calculating the mean or finding the median are forms of statistical inference.
    - Probability is about utilizing the estimated parameters of a model to predict something about future data. 

- There are two major types of statistical models:
    - **Parameteric Models:** models that have a finite parameter space (i.e. normal distributions). Examples of finite parameters would be the mean or median.
    - **Non-Parameteric Models:** models that have a infinite parameter space (i.e. bootstrap).

### Most Common Parameteric Models:

- **Normal Distribution:** (This is the most important distribution in all of the statistics)
    - The Normal Distribution is the ionic bell-shaped distribution everyone knows about. This distribution is iconic because sample statistics distributions often follow a normal distribution.
        - The normal distribution is symmetrical 
        - It follows the central limit theorem.
    - The **Standard Normal Distribution** is one in which the units on the x-axis are expressed as in terms of the standard deviations away from the mean. 
    - To compare data in the standard normal distribution you subtract the mean then divide by the standard deviation which results in the **z-score**. The process of Calculating the z-score is called **Normalization** or **Standardization**.
    - One of the most promient methods of determining whether a dataset follows a normal distribution is to generate a QQ-plot. A QQ-plot is generated by ordering the z-scores from low to high and plot them along both the Y and X axis.
        - Since were plotting the z-scores the units correspond to the standard deviation. 
    - If the points roughly fall on a diagonal line, then the sample distribution is considered to be a normal distribution.
    - Additional Normal Distribution Magic:
        - Sample Statistics Distributions are distributions that are created by plotting the parameter (i.e. mean) calculated from a multitude of samples from a population. These Sample Distributions when plotted form a normal distribution.
    - **Summary:**
        - The normal distribution are utilized to mathetmatically approximation of uncertainty and variability 
        - Raw data typically doesn't come in a Normal Distribution, but the sample statistics distributions of a population are typically  
        normally distributed.
        - Converting data to z-scores, you subtract the mean of the data and divide by the standard deviation; you can then compare the data to a normal distribution.

- **Possion Distribution:**
    - The Possion Distribution tells us the distribution of events per unit of time/space to another. 
    - It's utilized to address queing questions "How much capacity do we need to be 95% sure of fully processing the internet traffic that arrives on a server in any 5-second period?". Or any situation where we can estimate the average number of events per unit of time or space and are interested in knowing how the number of events occuring differ in time or space.
    - The key parameter of the Possion distribution is Lambda. 
        - Lambda: the mena number of events that occurs a in specified interval of time or space. 
        - In the Possion Distribution lambda is also equal to the variance of the distribution.
    - **Summary:** The Possion Distribution tells us the distribution of stochastic events per unit of time/space to another when we sample many such units. It is typically, used to model any situation in which we're interested in knowing how the number of events occuring differ in a static unit of time or space 

- **Exponential Distribution:**
    - Exponential Distribution is utilized to model the distribution of time or distance between events:
        - time between visits to a website or between cars arriving at a toll plaza
    - Exponential Distribution utilizes the same parameter of the lambda possion distribution.
    - One of the most useful features of the exponential distribution is it's memoryless property:
        - The memoryless property is when the likelihood of something happening in the future has no relation to whether or not it has happened in the past.
        - The history of the function is irrelevant to the future.
    - **Summary:** The Exponential Distributions role is to model the time or distance between events.

- **Weibull Distribution:**
    - In many situations the event rate does not remain constant over time (i.e. mechinical failure). If an event rate does change over time then the Possion and Exponetial Distributions cannot accurately model this phenomena. 
    - The Weibull Distribution is an extension of the Exponential Distribution, in which the event rate is allowed to change as specified by a shape parameter, beta. If beta > 1, the probability of event increases over time.
    - When trying to estimate the best-fit Weibull Distribution you estimate two parameters:
        - shape parameter (beta): this parameter allows event rate to change over time unlike the Possion and Exponential Distributions.
        - scale parameter (eta): affects the scale of the Weibull distribution
    - Due to this property of the Weibull Distribution it's typically utilized for the time-to-failure analysis:
        - Life Expectancy 
        - Mechanical Failures
    - **Summary:** Weibull Distribution is a distribution used for modeling the changing event rate over time (e.g. an increasing probability of device failure). Making it extremely useful for time-to-failure analysis.

### Non-Parametric Model:

- **Bootstrap:**
    - **Bootstrap** is a resampling technique that can be utilized to estimate the sampling distribution of a statistic, or of a model parameters. This is done by drawing additonaly samples, with replacement, from your current sample (dataset) itself. Recalculating from the sample itself and recalculate the statistics or model for each resample. 

    - **Features of Bootstrap:**
        - Bootstrap does not assume your data or the sample statistics being normally distributed.
        - Bootstrapping works because of the law of large numbers. As the number of records in a sample set increases bootstraps converges towards the true distribution of the sample statistics of a given population.
        - Bootstrap can be applied in similar fashion in a wide variatey of circumstances because it's non-parametric. Therefore, we do not need to mathematically approximatate the sampling distribution.
    - **Warning about Bootstrap:** 
        - Bootstrap does not compensate for a small sample size; for it does not create new data nor does it fill in holes in the existing
        data. It merely informs us about how alot of additional samples would behave when drawn from a population like our original sample. 
    
    - **Bootstrap Procedure:**
        1. Draw a sample value, record, replace it.
        2. Repeat n times.
        3. Record the mean of the n resampled values.
        4. Repeat steps 1–3 R times.
        5. Use the R results to:
            - Calculate their standard deviation (this estimates sample mean standard error).
            - Produce a histogram or boxplot.
            - Find a confidence interval.
    
    - When bootstarp is applied to the data of predicitive models, the aggregating of multiple bootstrap predictions outperforms the use of a single model.